.\" zemacs.1 — man page for zemacs(1)
.\" Companion: zemacsall(1) — comprehensive reference covering the modal
.\" editor, keymaps (vim/emacs/spacemacs), the IDE workbench, embedded
.\" scripting (zshrs, stryke), version control (magit), LSP/DAP, and health.
.TH ZEMACS 1 "2026-07-13" "zemacs 0.4.20" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zemacs \- modal terminal text editor in Rust (tree-sitter + LSP)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zemacs
.RI [ flags ]
.RI [ file
\&...]
.PP
.B zemacs
.I file : row : col
.PP
.B zemacs
.B \-\-health
.RI [ category ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zemacs
is a modal text editor built on
.BR tree\-sitter
syntax, the Language Server Protocol
.RB ( LSP ),
and the Debug Adapter Protocol
.RB ( DAP ).
Files open in a normal (command) mode; keystrokes drive selections and
edits, and text is typed in insert mode. Syntax highlighting, indentation,
and structural navigation come from compiled tree-sitter grammars rather
than regular expressions.
.PP
Unlike a single-keymap editor,
.B zemacs
ships multiple first-class keymaps \(em
.BR vim ,
.BR emacs ,
and
.BR spacemacs
\(em selectable in configuration, alongside a native default map. It
embeds the
.BR zshrs (1)
shell and the
.BR stryke (1)
scripting language for in-editor evaluation, provides a magit-style
version-control interface, and boots an optional IDE workbench
.RB ( \-\-ide )
with a file-tree sidebar.
.PP
Positional arguments are files to open. A file may carry a position as
.IB file : row
or
.IB file : row : col
(1-based); a leading
.BI + N
opens the first file at line
.IR N ,
and a bare
.B +
opens it at the last line.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Mode
.TP
.B \-\-strict
Bail on the first error for commands that can fail, instead of
continuing best-effort.
.TP
.B \-\-tutor
Load the built-in tutorial buffer.
.TP
.B \-\-ide
Boot the IDE workbench (file-tree sidebar and panels; toggle with F2).
.TP
.BI \-\-health " [category]"
Check the editor setup and exit.
.I category
may be a language name,
.BR clipboard ,
.BR languages ,
.BR all\-languages ,
or
.BR all .
.B languages
respects user configuration;
.B all\-*
does not. The default is
.B all
with language filtering.
.SS Grammars
.TP
.BI \-g " {fetch|build}" ", " \-\-grammar " {fetch|build}"
Fetch or build the tree-sitter grammars declared in
.IR languages.toml .
.SS Configuration
.TP
.BI \-c " file" ", " \-\-config " file"
Use
.I file
as the configuration file instead of the default.
.TP
.BI \-w " path" ", " \-\-working\-dir " path"
Set the initial working directory.
.I path
must be an existing directory.
.TP
.BI \-\-log " file"
Write the structured log to
.I file
instead of the default
.RI ( ~/.zemacs/zemacs.log ).
.SS Layout
.TP
.B \-\-vsplit
Open the given files in vertically split windows.
.TP
.B \-\-hsplit
Open the given files in horizontally split windows.
.TP
.BI + N
Open the first file at line
.IR N .
A bare
.B +
opens it at the last line.
.SS System
.TP
.B \-v
Increase logging verbosity. Repeat up to three times
.RB ( \-vvv ).
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print the help summary and exit.
.SH KEYMAPS
.B zemacs
selects a keymap from configuration. The shipped maps are:
.TP
.B default
The native zemacs map.
.TP
.B vim
Vim-style modal editing.
.TP
.B emacs
Emacs-style chorded bindings.
.TP
.B spacemacs
Spacemacs-style leader
.RB ( SPC )
menus.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.zemacs/config.toml
User configuration (keymap, theme, editor options). Overridden by
.BR \-\-config .
.TP
.I ~/.zemacs/languages.toml
Per-language configuration: LSP servers, formatters, grammar sources.
.TP
.I ~/.zemacs/runtime/
User runtime overlay (themes, grammars, queries) layered over the
bundled runtime.
.TP
.I <workspace>/.zemacs/config.toml
Workspace-local configuration, merged over the user config for files
under that workspace root.
.TP
.I ~/.zemacs/zemacs.log
Default structured log. Indexing, grammar builds, and background work
are logged here, never printed to the terminal.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ZEMACS_RUNTIME
Runtime directory (themes, grammars, queries) searched ahead of the
bundled runtime. Takes precedence over
.IR ~/.zemacs/runtime .
.TP
.B ZEMACS_DEFAULT_RUNTIME
Fallback runtime directory, read only if it was set when
.B zemacs
was compiled.
.PP
The configuration root is always
.IR ~/.zemacs ,
independent of
.BR XDG_CONFIG_HOME .
The default log
.RI ( ~/.zemacs/zemacs.log )
lives there too.
The cache root (background state) follows the platform base-directory strategy
.RB ( XDG_CACHE_HOME
on Linux).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B zemacs
exits
.B 0
on a clean shutdown. A failure to parse arguments, read a required
configuration file, or initialize the terminal exits non-zero with a
.BI zemacs: " message"
diagnostic on standard error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR zemacsall (1),
.BR zshrs (1),
.BR stryke (1)
.SH AUTHORS
.B zemacs
is developed by MenkeTechnologies. Source and issues:
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/zemacs
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/zemacs
.UE
.PP
Online docs:
.UR https://menketechnologies.github.io/zemacs/
https://menketechnologies.github.io/zemacs/
.UE
.SH BUGS
Report at
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/zemacs/issues
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/zemacs/issues
.UE
