.\" zmaxall.1 — comprehensive reference for zmax(1)
.\" Companion to the concise zmax(1) page. Covers architecture, keymaps,
.\" the IDE workbench, version control, embedded scripting, language
.\" support, health checks, and configuration.
.TH ZMAXALL 1 "2026-07-22" "zmax 0.4.39" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zmaxall \- comprehensive reference for the zmax modal editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zmax
.RI [ flags ]
.RI [ file
\&...]
.SH OVERVIEW
This page documents
.B zmax
in depth: its crate architecture, the four shipped keymaps, the IDE
workbench, the magit-style version-control interface, embedded
scripting, language support, and configuration. For the option summary
and the common invocation forms, see
.BR zmax (1).
.PP
.B zmax
is a modal terminal editor written in Rust. It combines tree-sitter
syntax, LSP, and DAP with multiple editing traditions (vim, emacs,
spacemacs) in a single binary, and hosts the
.BR zshrs (1)
shell and the
.BR stryke (1)
scripting language for in-editor evaluation.
.SH ARCHITECTURE
The workspace ships 13 first-party crates plus an
.B xtask
build helper. The default member is
.BR zmax-term ,
which builds the
.B zmax
binary.
.TP
.B zmax-core
Ropes, selections, transactions, syntax (tree-sitter), and the diff
engine.
.TP
.B zmax-view
The editor model: documents, views, registers, the document diff gutter.
.TP
.B zmax-term
The terminal front end, command set, keymaps, and UI components
(the default binary).
.TP
.B zmax-tui
Terminal rendering primitives.
.TP
.BR zmax-lsp ", " zmax-lsp-types
Language Server Protocol client and wire types.
.TP
.BR zmax-dap ", " zmax-dap-types
Debug Adapter Protocol client and wire types.
.TP
.B zmax-vcs
Git integration: the diff base for the gutter, status, and the
magit-style interface backend.
.TP
.B zmax-loader
Configuration, runtime-directory resolution, grammar loading, logging.
.TP
.BR zmax-event ", " zmax-parsec ", " zmax-stdx
Event handling, parser combinators, and shared standard-library
extensions.
.SH KEYMAPS
.B zmax
selects one keymap at startup from configuration.
.TP
.B default
The native zmax map.
.TP
.B vim
Vim-style modal editing: normal, insert, visual, and operator-pending
behavior.
.TP
.B emacs
Emacs-style chorded bindings
.RB ( C\- x,
.BR C\- c
prefixes).
.TP
.B spacemacs
Spacemacs-style leader menus under the space
.RB ( SPC )
key.
.PP
Modes follow the modal convention: a normal (command) mode drives
motion and selection, and an insert mode types text. The status line
reports the active mode and any pending count or register.
.SH THE IDE WORKBENCH
Launching with
.B \-\-ide
opens the IDE workbench: a file-tree sidebar and supporting panels
around the editor. The sidebar toggles with
.BR F2 .
The workbench exposes file management, git actions, a run console, and
search over the workspace without leaving the editor.
.SH VERSION CONTROL
.B zmax
is git-backed and provides both a magit-style interactive status buffer
and Emacs
.B vc
command ports.
.PP
The magit status buffer stages and unstages files and hunks, commits
(including
.BR \-\-amend ),
pushes, fetches, pulls, stashes, rebases, and switches or creates
branches. Discarding a file restores it from
.BR HEAD .
After any operation that moves
.B HEAD
or rewrites the working tree, the diff gutters of open buffers are
refreshed so their hunks reflect the new tree.
.PP
The
.B vc
ports cover per-file and repository log and diff, branch and tag
creation, file rename and delete, revert, ignore, and an
add\-commit\-push chain
.RB ( C\- x
.B v c)
that stages, commits, and pushes in one step.
.SH EMBEDDED SCRIPTING
.B zmax
embeds ten MenkeTechnologies interpreters as pure-Rust crates compiled
into the binary, each evaluated against the live buffer through one
uniform host API:
.BR elisp ,
.BR vimscript ,
.BR awk ,
and on unix
.BR zshrs (1),
the compiled Unix shell,
.BR stryke (1),
the scripting language, plus
.BR ruby ,
.BR php ,
.BR python ,
.BR node
and
.BR arb .
They run in-editor
.RB ( :elisp ", " :vim ", " :awk ", " :zsh ", " :stryke ", " :ruby ", "
.BR :php ", " :python ", " :node ", " :arb ),
so shell and scripting one-liners run inside the editor process rather
than a separate subprocess. The vim ex-commands
.BR :python ", " :ruby " and " :perl
evaluate through the embedded interpreters, spawning no system interpreter.
.SH LANGUAGE SUPPORT
Syntax highlighting, indentation, and structural selections are driven
by compiled tree-sitter grammars declared in
.IR languages.toml .
Grammars are fetched or built with:
.PP
.RS 4
.B zmax \-g fetch
.br
.B zmax \-g build
.RE
.PP
Language servers and formatters are configured per language in the same
file. Diagnostics, completion, go-to-definition, references, hover, and
formatting come from the configured
.B LSP
server; debugging is driven through
.B DAP
adapters.
.SH HEALTH
.B zmax \-\-health
.RI [ category ]
reports on the editor setup and exits. Categories:
.TP
.B clipboard
The detected system clipboard provider.
.TP
.B languages
Configured languages, honoring the user configuration.
.TP
.B all\-languages
Every known language, ignoring user configuration.
.TP
.B all
Everything, with language filtering. This is the default.
.PP
A bare language name reports the grammar, LSP, formatter, and debugger
status for that one language.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration lives under
.IR ~/.zmax :
.TP
.I config.toml
Editor options, the active keymap, theme, and UI preferences.
.TP
.I languages.toml
Per-language grammar sources, LSP servers, formatters, and debug
adapters.
.TP
.I runtime/
A user runtime overlay (themes, grammars, queries) layered over the
bundled runtime.
.PP
A workspace may carry its own
.I .zmax/config.toml
and
.IR .zmax/languages.toml ,
merged over the user configuration for files under that workspace root.
The
.B \-c
.RI ( \-\-config )
flag overrides the user
.IR config.toml .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.zmax/config.toml
User configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.zmax/languages.toml
User language configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.zmax/runtime/
User runtime overlay.
.TP
.I <workspace>/.zmax/config.toml
Workspace-local configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.zmax/zmax.log
Default structured log (indexing, grammar builds, background work).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ZMAX_RUNTIME
Runtime directory searched ahead of the bundled runtime and
.IR ~/.zmax/runtime .
.TP
.B ZMAX_DEFAULT_RUNTIME
Fallback runtime directory, honored only if set at compile time.
.PP
The configuration root is always
.IR ~/.zmax ,
independent of
.BR XDG_CONFIG_HOME .
The cache root follows the platform base-directory strategy
.RB ( XDG_CACHE_HOME
on Linux).
.SH INVOCATION
Positional arguments are files, each optionally carrying a position:
.PP
.RS 4
.B zmax src/main.rs:120:8
.RE
.PP
opens
.I src/main.rs
with the cursor at row 120, column 8 (1-based). A leading
.BI + N
opens the first file at line
.IR N ;
a bare
.B +
opens it at the last line.
.B \-\-vsplit
and
.B \-\-hsplit
open the given files in split windows.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR zmax (1),
.BR zshrs (1),
.BR stryke (1),
.BR git (1)
.SH AUTHORS
.B zmax
is developed by MenkeTechnologies. Source and issues:
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/zmax
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/zmax
.UE
.PP
Online docs:
.UR https://menketechnologies.github.io/zmax/
https://menketechnologies.github.io/zmax/
.UE
.SH BUGS
Report at
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/zmax/issues
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/zmax/issues
.UE
